title: What is theoretical neuroscience?

In recent years, most of the behavioral sciences have seen a heavy influx of
influence from the neurosciences. Most obviously, the psychology of only three
decades ago was almost bereft of brain-related talk. Now, however, one of the
fastest growing areas of psychology is cognitive neuroscience, whose
practitioners regularly talk of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology, and employ
various brain imaging and measurement techniques, like fMRI and EEG. The same
trend can be found in many other disciplines as well, including linguistics,
economics, and philosophy.


While the growing influence of neuroscience is undeniable, it would be a
mistake to think that the field of neuroscience itself is monolithic. Quite
the contrary: the tens of thousands of posters and presentations at the
Society for Neuroscience meeting held every year are divided into many
sections, such as molecular neuroscience, cellular neuroscience, systems
neuroscience, neuroanatomy, developmental neuroscience, behavioral
neuroscience, cognitive neuroscience, and so on. Often, the researchers in one
area are not able to understand or communicate effectively with those from
another, despite the fact that ultimately, everyone in the building wants to
understand how the brain works.


This, of course, is not a problem unique to neuroscience. Many other areas of
biology suffer the same difficulties, as do other sciences such as geology,
chemistry, and even physics. However, one main advantage that, for example,
physics has in mitigating these challenges is a widely shared technical
vocabulary for describing both problems and solutions in the field. The
development and application of these quantitative tools have helped physics
develop rapidly, leading us to exciting new discoveries, as well as deep,
challenging problems. The subfield of physics most centrally concerned with
the development of such tools is theoretical physics.


Interestingly, an analogous subfield has been developing in neuroscience over
the last few decades as well, and it is often appropriately called
"theoretical neuroscience" (though perhaps equally as often called
"computational neuroscience"). In fact, the analogy between theoretical
neuroscience and theoretical physics is quite useful for understanding the
importance of theoretical neuroscience to neuroscience in general. For
instance, both theoretical physics and theoretical neuroscience are centrally
interested in quantifying the phenomena under study. This does not mean merely
statistically quantifying the data generated by the phenomena, but rather
coming up with quantitative descriptions of the deterministic regularities and
mechanisms giving rise to those data. Take, for instance, one of the greatest
advances in theoretical physics, the development of Newton's three laws of
motion. The second, perhaps most famous, law is that "The alteration of motion
is ever proportional to the motive force impressed; and is made in the
direction of the right line in which that force is impressed" (Newton, 1729,
p. 19). In short form: F=ma. The purpose of this statement is to make a clear,
straightforward hypothesis about motion. Similar principles in the
Neural Engineering Framework for neural
representation, transformation, and dynamics.


A second analogy between these two subfields is that both are interested in
summarizing an enormous amount of data. Newton's second law is intended to
apply to all forms of motion, be it rectilinear, circular, or what have you.
Measuring all such forms of motion, and describing the results statistically
would not be nearly as concise. Similarly, theoretical neuroscientists are
attempting to understand the basic principles behind neural function. Often,
they would like their mathematical descriptions to be as general as possible
-- although there is some debate regarding whether or not the kind of
unification being striven for in physics should be a goal for theoretical
neuroscience.


A third crucial analogy between theoretical physics and theoretical
neuroscience is that the disciplines are speculative. Most such quantitative
descriptions of general mechanisms go beyond the available data. As such, they
almost always suggest more structure than the data warrants, and hence more
experiments to perform. Looking again to Newton's second law, it is clear that
Newton intended it to be true for all velocities. However, special relativity
has subsequently demonstrated that the law is measurably violated for large
velocities. With speculation comes risk. Especially for a young field like
theoretical neuroscience, the risk of being wrong is high. But, the risk of
becoming lost in the complexity of the data without such speculation is much
higher. The real fruit of a field like theoretical neuroscience -- fruit
realized by theoretical physics -- is (hopefully) the identification of a set
of principles that lets massive amounts of data be summarized, thereby
suggesting new questions and opening lines of communication between different
sub-disciplines.


Of course, there are crucial disanalogies between these fields as well. For
instance, we can think of physics as being interested in questions of what
there is, while neuroscience is interested in questions of who we are. As
well, neuroscience is a much younger discipline than physics, and so the
methods for making measurements of the system of interest are still rapidly
developing.


Nevertheless, the similarities can help us understand why theoretical
neuroscience is important for the development of neuroscience. Like
theoretical physics, theoretical neuroscience can help in at least two crucial
ways. Specifically, it should:


  1. Quantify, and hence make more precise and testable, hypotheses about the functioning of neural systems;


  2. Summarize large amounts of experimental data, and hence serve to unify the many sources of data from different "neuro-"" and behavioral sub-disciplines.


The first of these stem from the commitment to using mathematics to describe
principles of neural function. The second is crucial for trying to deal with
the unavoidable complexities of neural systems. This is a challenge not faced
to the same degree by many physicists. Characterizing a system of billions of
parts as if each is identical, and as if the connections between all of them
are approximately the same can lead to very accurate characterizations of
physical systems (e.g. the ideal gas law). The same is not true of neural
systems. Large neural systems where all of the parts are the same, and
interact in the same way simply do not exist.


Thus, the links between the "lowest" and "highest" levels of characterizing
neural systems are complex and unavoidable. It is perhaps in this kind of
circumstance that quantification of the system of interest plays its most
crucial role. If we can state our hypotheses about neural function at a "high"
level, and quantify the relationship between levels, then our high-level
hypothesis will connect to low-level details. In fact, ideally, a hypothesis
at any level should contact data at all other levels. It is precisely this
kind of unification of experimental data that is desperately needed in the
behavioral sciences to support cross-disciplinary communication, and
eventually a mature theory of biological cognition.


This ideal role for theoretical neuroscience has not yet been realized.
Perhaps this is because there has historically been more of a focus on "low"
levels of neural systems (i.e. single cells or small networks). This is
perfectly understandable in light of the complexity of the system being
tackled. Nevertheless, we believe we are now in a position to begin to move
past this state of affairs.


In the context of our lab, we adopt methods from theoretical
neuroscience that we believe currently have the best potential to realize this
ideal role. At the same time we hope our work will prod
theoretical neuroscientists to consider expanding the viable areas of
application of their methods to all of the behavioral sciences.
